Telos, the Warden is an anima construct residing in the Heart of Gielinor. Due to the fighting above, Telos is slowly beginning to awaken. However, Telos is only interested in protecting the Heart, and not Gielinor as a whole. Realising the threat it may cause to the inhabitants of Gielinor, Soothsayer Sybil sent the World Guardian to stop Telos before it becomes too powerful.

It is billed as the toughest solo boss monster in RuneScape. Its chamber is accessible through a large "tree" like structure in the middle of the dungeon.

To fight Telos, players first must obtain an ancient sigil. The four components of the sigil can be obtained by killing all the generals in the Heart at least once; therefore, there is a minimum of 80 Attack, Prayer, Magic and Ranged (all of which may be boosted) required to reach Telos. The components are always a guaranteed drop, but only appear to the player who dealt the most damage to the boss. Once used on the door in the middle of the dungeon, it will be consumed and give the player permanent access to the boss chamber.

Killing Telos is a possible Soul Reaper assignment. The assigned number of kills can vary between 2 and 8.

Telos is one of the bosses required to unlock the title [Name] the Reaper, which is a requirement for the Reaper Crew achievement. Defeating Telos at a minimum of 100% enrage or greater is a requirement for the trimmed completionist cape. Upon killing Telos at 500% or more enrage, players unlock [Name] the Warden title. A silver version [Name] the Warden of the title can be unlocked by killing Telos at 2,000% enrage. A gold version [Name] the Warden of the title can be unlocked by killing Telos at 4,000% enrage.

Deathtouched darts work against Telos, clearing one phase for each dart used. They may be used to achieve the trimmed completionist cape requirement, along with increasing enrage, although they will not work for obtaining any of the Warden titles.

Obtaining all of Telos's unique drops will unlock the title, [Name] the Dormant.

Right clicking the roots leading into Telos's arena gives the player the additional options to use the last custom enrage and to enable or disable colourblind mode.

The music track Anima is unlocked by entering Telos's arena.

Source: https://runescape.wiki/w/Telos,_the_Warden
